****: An Atmospheric Radiative Transfer Algorithm using Compressed
Lookup Tables

| Sergio De Souza-Machado, L. Larrabee Strow,
| Howard Motteler and Scott Hannon

| Physics Department
| University of Maryland Baltimore County
| Baltimore, MD 21250 USA

| Copyright 2011
| University of Maryland Baltimore County
| All Rights Reserved
| v1.00

| Sergio De Souza-Machado: = sergio@umbc.edu
| L. Larrabee Strow: strow@umbc.edu

**ABSTRACT**

is a radiative transfer code for a non-scattering Earth’s atmosphere. As
packaged, it can be used to output monochromatic gas optical depths, and
clear sky radiances and jacobians. This Matlab package is a simpler
version of the f77 version, which includes scattering and fluxes.

The code is driver by profiles in the .rtp format allowing the user to
easily change atmospheric conditions as needed. US Standard Atmosphere
optical depths have been precomputed and saved to a lookup table. This
means (linear) interpolations required to compute the optical depths for
arbitrary atmospheric profiles can be done very rapidly, as can the
derivatives needed for the Jacobians. This makes very fast.

The code in the basic Test package allows the user to do RT calculations
for a downlooking instruments at the top of atmosphere (TOA), as well as
code to only compute optical depths. This basic package assumes the
“klayers” levels are the same as those in the kCompressed Database. NLTE
radiance effects in the 4 um CO2 band are included in daytime RT
calculations.

A more versatile package allows one to to use pressure layerings
different than that of the kCompressed Database. This is required for
uplooking instruments as the rapid variation of temperature and profile
gas constituents near the instrument, require a finer layering than that
of the standard kCompressed pressure layering.

We hope that the ease of use, range of features and speed of , make it a
useful tool. In addition to the main source code, some packages need to
be picked up. One is , which allows an user to input a radiosonde or
model point profile, and output a layer averaged profile that can use.
Another is the :math:`RTP` package, which is a AIRS Level II file
format.

This document is very much a work in progress. Some major omissions
include references, significant examples of output, and comparisons of
output to observed spectra. These omissions will be rectified in the
future. Please give us your feedback on both the code and the
documentation!

Introduction
============

stands for “kCompressed Atmospheric Radiative Transfer Algorithm.” This
is an infrared, “monochromatic” radiative transfer algorithm written for
a one dimensional non-scattering Earth atmosphere.

At the heart of the code are routines to uncompress an optical depth
database, computed for the US Standard Profile and for 10 temperature
offsets (-50 K, -40K, ..., +40 K, +50 K) from this profile. This makes
computing optical depths for any realistic Earth atmosphere very fast
and accurate, as the code only needs to interpolate the arbitrary
profile using this underlying temperature grid. Uncompressing the
database also rapidly yields analytic temperature jacobians.

The code was originally written in F77, and morphed to include upwelling
and downwelling clear sky radiative transfer calculations, calculations
in a scattering atmosphere, NLTE effects in the 4 um CO2 band, and
fluxes and heating rates calculations. This Matlab package encapsulates
the uncompression routines, and provides examples of how to produce
clear sky optical depths and radiative transfer calculations. The
package is tied in with UMBC and “RTP” packages. The former takes a
levels profile, and produces a layers averaged profile. The latter is a
.hdf based file format, and allows us to include all necessary
parameters (such as profile information, satellite and solar angles,
emissivities) into a “Radiative Transfer Protocol” file.

Radiative transfer
==================

For a downward looking instrument, in a clear sky, the surface term and
layer emission terms are automatically included in the radiative
transfer calculation. In addition, reflected thermal and solar terms can
also be included :

.. math::

   R(\nu) = R_{\hbox{\it surface}}(\nu) + R_{\hbox{\it layer emission}}(\nu) + 
   R_{\hbox{\it thermal}}(\nu) + R_{\hbox{\it solar}}(\nu)

where the terms are the surface, layer emissions, reflected thermal and
solar respectively. The reflected thermal term is computed accurately by
determining (monochromatically) the layer to ground cumulative sum of
absorption coefficients, and then using an optimum diffusive angle based
on a parameterization of angle as a function of this cumulative sum.
This makes the inclusion of reflected thermal in the code quick and
accurate. By differentiating the radiance equation with respect to a
layer gas amount or temperature, the radiance Jacobian is obtained.
Dropping the surface and reflected thermal terms enables to compute the
radiance measured by an upward looking instrument as well. The radiative
transfer routines include effects of curvature on angles that deviate
from nadir.

More documentation on the driver files, and on the convolution routines,
can be found in the appropriately named pdf files.

Analytic Jacobians
==================

Taking into account the view angle correction, if :math:`\tau_{i}` is
the optical depth due to gas G at layer :math:`i`, given by
:math:`\tau_{i} = q_{i} K_{i}/\mu{i}` where the symbols respectively
stand for optical depth (dimensionless), gas amount (kmoles/cm2), gas
absorption (cm2/kmol) and :math:`cos(view angle)`, then the finite
difference column gas jacobian is given by the difference between the
new and unperturbed radiances :math:`\delta r` = :math:`r_{new} - r-{0}`
when the gas amounts in layers :math:`1` to :math:`N` are perturbed by a
fraction :math:`\delta`. The (finite differences) column jacobians can
be obtained from the (gas) layer analytic jacobians using

.. math::

   \delta r = \frac{\partial r}{\partial q_1} \delta q_1 + 
              \frac{\partial r}{\partial q_2} \delta q_2 + ... + 
              \frac{\partial r}{\partial q_N} \delta q_N

or

.. math::

   \delta r = J_{1} \delta q_1 + J_{2} \delta q_2 + ...
                  J_{N} \delta q_N

 Usually we take a constant perturbation to the column ie
:math:`q_{l} \rightarrow 
q_{1}(1 + f)` where :math:`f \ll 1`. Then
:math:`\delta q_{l} \rightarrow f q_{l}` and
:math:`\delta r = f \{ J_{1} q_1 + J_{2} q_2 + ... + J_{N} q_N \} `. For
example, for a 2 layer atmosphere the upwelling radiance (without
background thermal or solar terms)jacobian terms :math:`J_{l}` is

.. math::

   \begin{aligned}
   r = & \epsilon B(T_{s}) exp(-q_{1} K_{1}/\mu_{1})exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu_{2}) +\\
       & B(1)(1-exp(-q_{1} K_{1}/\mu_{1}))exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu_{2}) + \\
       & B(2)(1-exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu_{2}))\end{aligned}

from which the layer jacobian terms :math:`J_{i}` reduce to

.. math::

   \begin{aligned}
   J_{1} = \frac{\partial r}{\partial q_1} = & 
    -\frac{K_1}{\mu_1}\epsilon B(T_{s})exp(-q_1 K_1/\mu_1)exp(-q_2 K_2/\mu_2) + \\
   &-\frac{K_1}{\mu_1} B(1)(exp(-q_{1} K_{1}/\mu{1})exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu{2})\end{aligned}

.. math::

   \begin{aligned}
   J_{2} = \frac{\partial r}{\partial q_2} = & 
   -\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}\epsilon B(T_{s})exp(-q_1 K_1/\mu_1)exp(-q_2 K_2/\mu_2) + \\
   & -\frac{K_2}{\mu_2} B(1)exp(-q_{1} K_{1}/\mu{1})exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu{2}) + \\
   & -\frac{K_2}{\mu_2} B(2)exp(-q_{2} K_{2}/\mu{2})\end{aligned}

kCompressed Database
====================

Optical depths are computed for all molecules in the HITRAN database,
using a profile derived from the 1962 US Standard Atmosphere. These
optical depths are pre-computed using a Matlab based line by line code.

The current database spans 605 to 2805 , broken up into chunks that are
25 wide. The point spacing of the current database is 0.0025 , which is
an average over five points spaced at 0.0005 . One hundred pressure
layers are used to generate the database, from 1100 mb down to 0.005 mb.
These pressure layers are the same as those used for the AIRS
(Atmospheric InfraRed Sounder) Fast Forward Model, for which is the
“Reference Forward Model.”The thickness of the layers is roughly 250 m
close to the surface, gradually increasing to as much as 2000m in the
upper atmosphere. The 100 layers were carefully chosen so as to keep
errors at the 0.1 K level, comparable to noise levels in contemporary
sounders.

The temperatures in the spectroscopic database are computed at the
Standard Profile, as well as ten temperature offsets (in increments of
:math:`\pm` 10K) on either side of the Standard Profile. These optical
depth tables are compressed using a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
technique, to produce our kCompressed database.

The current spectroscopic compressed tables use the HITRAN98 database
for both line-parameters and cross-sections. The full and first-order
:math:`CO_{2}` linemixing is from refining the modeling undertaken by
David Tobin. It should be more accurate than that currently in GENLN2.
in addition, we have used the latest O2 and N2 continuum models (see
Lafferty and J.-M. Hartmann et al in Applied Optics 1996, 1997). Other
updates to spectroscopy include the “local” water lineshape as defined
by CKD.

To compute the absorption coefficients for an arbitrary profile, the
look-up tables are interpolated in temperature, and scaled in gas
absorber amount. These interpolations allow easy computation of analytic
temperature derivatives, from which we can compute temperature
Jacobians. is not limited to these 100 AIRS pressure levels/layers. The
user can change the pressure levels scheme in , and will then also do a
pressure interpolation (as long as the new pressures span 1100 to 0.005
mb).

The speed and features of the code make it an appealing alternative to
other existing “line by line” codes such as GENLN2 and LBLRTM. The
accuracy of the database has been extensively compared to GENLN2. should
contain the latest spectroscopy/lineshape information. The
transmittances computed by are smooth and well behaved, which will allow
people to develop fast-forward models.

GasIDs
======

The gasIDs used by and follow the HITRAN convention. “gasids\_H2008”
(and the earlier “gasids\_H92\_H2k”) in this :math:`DOC` subdirectory,
provide a list of gasID vs commonly used name and/or chemical formula.

Units and Definitions
=====================

Frequencies are in units of wavenumbers (), temperatures are in Kelvins.
The gas profiles expected by use path averages over the layers, and are
in units of :math:`\hbox{\em molecules} {\hbox{cm}}^{-2}`. Temperatures
should be specified in *kelvin*, while pressures and partial pressures
should be expressed in *millibar*.

Output gas and mixed path optical depths are dimensionless (absorption
coefficient :math:`\times` gas amount); obviously so are transmittances.
Output radiances are in blackbody radiance units
(:math:`\hbox{\em milliwatts}
\;\ m^{-2} sr^{-1}/{\hbox{cm}}^{-1}`). Jacobians can be output in one of
three modes : (a) :math:`d(\hbox{\em rad})/ds_{m}`, where :math:`s_{m}`
is the temperature or gas amount in layer :math:`m`, (b)
:math:`d(\hbox{\em rad})/ds_{m} \times Z_{m}`, where :math:`s_{m}` is
the temperature or gas amount in layer :math:`m`, and :math:`Z_{m}` is
an unit perturbation (+1 K if temperature, or +gas amount in
:math:`m`\ th layer) and (c)
:math:`d(\hbox{\em BT})/ds_{m} \times Z_{m}`, where :math:`s_{m}` is the
temperature or gas amount in layer :math:`m`, and :math:`Z_{m}` is an
unit perturbation (+1 K if temperature, or +gas amount in :math:`m`\ th
layer)

Installing and running 
=======================

This is for the user that wants to install and use as quickly as
possible. We purposely keep this user manual short, and ask the user to
examine the “user\_set\*.m” codes in the subdirectory in great detail,
so as to understand how to use the package.

Distributing 
-------------

The distribution is divided into three parts :

-  | Main tarfile :math:`kcmix_matlabVYYY.tar` where :math:`YYY` is the
   version number. This will contain the entire source code
   distribution, many needed data files, and the documentation.

-  | kCompressed Database : about 600Mb, supplied on CDs. We supply two
   versions, the big endian or the little endian versions

Installing 
-----------

Having obtained the above three, the user can now proceed to install :
Untar :math:`kcmix_matlabVYYY.tar` : this will create a main
subdirectory, named PACKAGE\_UPnDOWNLOOK\_2011, as well as many
subdirectories containing the source code, data files and so on.

::

    drwxr-xr-x 2 sergio pi_strow    7 Mar 24 17:31 Test
    drwxr-xr-x 2 sergio pi_strow    4 Mar 24 17:29 RTPFILES
    drwxr-xr-x 2 sergio pi_strow   13 Mar 24 17:23 DOC
    drwxr-xr-x 2 sergio pi_strow   12 Mar 24 15:24 CONVOLUTION
    drwxr-xr-x 6 sergio pi_strow   26 Mar 24 04:49 VariablePressure
    drwxr-xr-x 6 sergio pi_strow    9 Mar 23 12:40 private
    drwxr-xr-x 3 sergio pi_strow    4 Mar 23 10:35 JACDOWN
    drwxr-xr-x 6 sergio pi_strow    6 Mar 22 15:38 DATA

Files in directories
====================

Main directory 
---------------

This contains the main files a user should need

Routines for uncompressing the database (:math:`kcmix*.m`) and the
continuum files (:math:`cont*.m`), for doing radiative transfer
(:math:`rtchunk\_Tsurf*.m`) are included here. The :math:`\_nojac`
extension to the name means the faster (non jacobian version), while
:math:`\_jac` is the slower, jacobian version. The main routines are
:math:`matlab\_kcarta\_downlook_*.m`

Note : if the user wants to edit which gases he/she should be included
in the “atmosphere”, then look for the line that says “edit this list to
only keep gases you DO want” in matlab\_kcarta\_downlook\_jac.m or
matlab\_kcarta\_downlook\_nojac.m or matlab\_kcarta\_opticaldepths.m;
default is to add :math:`ALL` gases.

::

    auxiliary_set.m
    contcalc2.m
    contcalc2_S_F.m
    continuum_temp_interp_weights_jac.m
    continuum_temp_interp_weights.m
    contjaccalc2.m
    dirname.m
    doload.m
    find_chunks.m
    initialize_extra.m
    initialize_kcmix.m
    kcmix2jac.m
    kcmix2.m
    matlab_kcarta_downlook_jac.m
    matlab_kcarta_downlook_nojac.m
    matlab_kcarta_opticaldepths.m
    nlte.m
    op_rtp_to_lbl2.m
    rtchunk_Tsurf_jac.m
    rtchunk_Tsurf.m
    temp_interp_weights_jac.m
    temp_interp_weights.m

As given out, the code was optimized for the 605 - 2830 spectral range
which is the range covered by AIRS, IASA, CRiS, and HIRS and AERI
instruments. However the code is flexible enough to allow optical depth
and radiance calculations in other spectral bands. Since the FWHM of
lines gets smaller (larger) as the wavenumbers get smaller (larger), the
resolution of the database must change. Each file in each spectral range
will contain 10000 points; so for example at the default 0.0025
resolution of the main IR default band (605-2830 ), the files each span
25 . We envisage the following :

::

      kcartachunks = 00080 : 0002.5 : 00150;  prefix = '/j';
      kcartachunks = 00140 : 0005.0 : 00310;  prefix = '/k';
      kcartachunks = 00300 : 0010.0 : 00510;  prefix = '/p';
      kcartachunks = 00500 : 0015.0 : 00605;  prefix = '/q';
      kcartachunks = 00605 : 0025.0 : 02830;  prefix = '/r'; ** default **
      kcartachunks = 02830 : 0025.0 : 03580;  prefix = '/s';
      kcartachunks = 03550 : 0100.0 : 05650;  prefix = '/m';
      kcartachunks = 05550 : 0150.0 : 08350;  prefix = '/n';
      kcartachunks = 08250 : 0250.0 : 12250;  prefix = '/o';
      kcartachunks = 12000 : 0500.0 : 25000;  prefix = '/v';
      kcartachunks = 25000 : 1000.0 : 44000;  prefix = '/u';

. For example, one run covering 605-2830 is fine, as is another run
covering 500-605 . But the code as written will not permit a single run
covering 500-2830 .

private
-------

This subdir contains files that are called by the main routines, and
should not be modified.

DOC
---

The documentation for this package

CONVOLUTION
-----------

Convolution routines. We include generic gaussian convolvers, as well as
AIRS SRF convolvers, and IASI/CRiS convolvers. Note the files contained
in this subdir will not be supported.

JACDOWN
-------

This has the main driver for a downlook jacobian calculation,
“jac\_downlook.m” which calls files in the :math:`private` subdirectory
underneath this. One can speed up the jacobian code by eg removing the
looping over the weighting functions, or over the temperatures.

RTPFILES
--------

Sample rtpfiles for this package; “desert” is a downlooking case at 100
AIRS layers, while the other is an uplooking case at a different
layering scheme. In addition we provide a subdirectory with some binary
files output from the f77 code.

DATA
----

Contains subdirectories with continuum, solar, NLTE and CO2 Chifunction
datafiles.

Examples of two driverfiles, one which computes optical depths (based on
a list the user supplies), and the other which computes radiances (and
jacobians if asked). The user should carefully examine these files, as
they provide a working outline of how to use this package.

Basically, the user is allowed to set the following parameters : which
HITRAN version to use, start/stop wavenumbers for the calculations,
whether or not to do Jacobians, what output units for the Jacobians,
what CKD version, and name of input rtp file.

::

    user_set_input_downlook.m        parameters driving dokcarta_downlook.m
    user_set_input_opticaldepths.m   parameters driving dokcarta_opticaldepths.m

The user needs to supply paths to where the solar files, continuum
files, nlte files, klayers executables, optical depth database and
reference profiles are; this is controlled via :math:`user\_set\_dirs.m`

::

    user_set_dirs.m                  set up the paths to directories

Finally the user can commence the computation, calling one or the other
of the routines named below (which call relevant files from above).

::

    dokcarta_downlook.m              compute RT
    dokcarta_opticaldepths.m         compute optical depths

This subdir also includes two matlab files, containing radiances output
using H2004 and H2008.

VariablePressure 
-----------------

This contains the main files a user should need This makes the code(s)
slower. The structure and content of the directories is the same as
before :math:`viz`

::

    drwxr-xr-x 2 sergio pi_strow    10 Mar 24 04:49 Test
    drwxr-xr-x 6 sergio pi_strow     8 Mar 23 11:58 private
    drwxr-xr-x 3 sergio pi_strow     4 Mar 23 10:36 JACUP_VarPress
    drwxr-xr-x 3 sergio pi_strow     4 Mar 23 10:35 JACDOWN_VarPress

| :math:`Test` has dokcarta\_downlook.m, dokcarta\_uplook.m (very
similar to the “downlook” case) and dokcarta\_opticaldepths.m.

| :math:`JADOWN\_VarPress` has jacobian routines for downlooking
instruments

| :math:`JACUP\_VarPress` has jacobian routines for uplooking
instruments

Comparisons against f77 and our code
====================================

We have tested this code against the f77 code and across the IR bands,
have errors less than 0.05 K in brightness temperature. The speeds are
also very similar (roughly about 60 seconds on a 2.6 GHz processor for a
full radiative transfer calculation).

The :math:`Test` directory contains
“matlab\_test\_desert\_0725\_2004.mat” which is a radiance computation
coming from running the “dokcarta\_downlook.m” in that directory.

.. figure:: ../RTPFILES/desert_rtp.png
   :alt: Sample output from “desert\_op.rtp”, convolved with AIRS SRFs

   Sample output from “desert\_op.rtp”, convolved with AIRS SRFs
[translatingfiles]
